---
layout: post
title: "Modern C++ on the ESP32: how I use it and why it may make sense"
---

In this post, I will talk about my daily experience with (modern) C++ on the ESP32, and why it may have finally become a good choice for reliable, complex applications running on low power devices.

As the adage goes, nowadays most often than not the most expensive resource in software development is your developers' time. While this is somewhat true in most areas, where 128 core server CPUs and beefy desktop and mobile chips can crunch away most of the inefficiency that plagued the softwares of yesteryear, this is still not true on embedded and ultra low power applications, a wild land where free memory is still measured in Kilobyte (pardon, Kibibyte), "garbage collection" is a bad word, and patching and updating are still a somewhat cumbersome and complex task.

While the world hasn't stood still at all in recent years, with inexpensive chips getting faster and faster at lower prices, I think is not wrong to say that the success of an embedded project still revolves around making the right compromises and picking the right tools for the job. 

### ESP32

The ESP32 is an embedded platform designed and built by the Chinese manufacturer Espressif, which has built a lot of buzz in recent years thanks to being quite feature-rich at a ridiculously low price point. It packs on a single compact SoC a wide array of interesting specs, including a dual-core 32-bit Xtensa CPU that can run up to 240 MHz, a ULP coprocessor, ~ 1/2 MiB of internal RAM, 2.4 GHz WiFi, Bluetooth (including BLE), and a wide array of interfaces (SPI buses, I2C, I2S, UART, ... ) that can be used to communicate with peripherals on the same board or to expand its capabilities. One extremely popular  for expansion thanks to  built around the success of its previous ESP8266 chip.


### C++ on ESP32: reasoning

If anyone has ever spoken to most old fashioned embedded developers, it would quickly learn that C++ hasn't really the best rap among languages for embedded chips.
It surely hasn't the cult status of C, which is after all extremely simple, hard to master, and until a short time ago still considered too expensive for certain boards where only Assembly would do. And surely it hasn't the hip factor of younger, arguably less crufty languages like Zig or Rust (the latter of which I really like), whose guarantees of safety and stability sound extremely promising when you don't have a "real" OS to fall back on you up when you screw up.

Still, for one reason or another, C++ is 

Most of this is probably due to its history as a "do-it-all" language that for too long strived to satisfy everyone by packing as many features it could while trying to keep API compatibility with C. 

While it could be true it might have scared away countless generations of developers with its way too many quirks (it has what, 7 different ways to initialize a value?), it must be also said that it hasn't stood still, waiting for successors to eat away at his mindshare. 

Revisions after C++11 have introduced many significant innovations that dramatically changed how people are supposed to write 






### Several features breakdown



### In conclusion

